\input texinfo
@setfilename niceload.info

@settitle niceload - slow down a program when the load average is above a certain limit

@node Top
@top niceload

@node NAME
@chapter NAME

niceload - slow down a program when the load average is above a certain limit

@node SYNOPSIS
@chapter SYNOPSIS

@strong{niceload} [-v] [-h] [-n nice] [-I io] [-L load] [-M mem] [-N]
[@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}sensor program] [-t time] [-s time|-f factor]
( command | -p PID [-p PID ...] | @asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}prg program )

@node DESCRIPTION
@chapter DESCRIPTION

GNU @strong{niceload} will slow down a program when the load average (or
other system activity) is above a certain limit. When the limit is
reached the program will be suspended for some time. Then resumed
again for some time.  Then the load average is checked again and we
start over.

Instead of load average @strong{niceload} can also look at disk I/O, amount
of free memory, or swapping activity.

If the load is 3.00 then the default settings will run a program
like this:

run 1 second, suspend (3.00-1.00) seconds, run 1 second, suspend
(3.00-1.00) seconds, run 1 second, ...

@node OPTIONS
@chapter OPTIONS

@table @asis
@item @strong{-B}
@anchor{@strong{-B}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}battery}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}battery}}

Suspend if the system is running on battery. Shorthand for:
-l -1 @asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}sensor 'cat /sys/class/power_supply/BAT0/status
/proc/acpi/battery/BAT0/state 2>/dev/null | grep -i -q discharging;
echo $?'

@item @strong{-f} @emph{FACTOR}
@anchor{@strong{-f} @emph{FACTOR}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}factor} @emph{FACTOR}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}factor} @emph{FACTOR}}

Suspend time factor. Dynamically set @strong{-s} as amount over limit *
factor. Default is 1.

@item @strong{-H}
@anchor{@strong{-H}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}hard}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}hard}}

Hard limit. @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}hard} will suspend the process until the system is
under the limits. The default is @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}soft}.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}io} @emph{iolimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}io} @emph{iolimit}}

@item @strong{-I} @emph{iolimit}
@anchor{@strong{-I} @emph{iolimit}}

Limit for I/O. The amount of disk I/O will be computed as a value 0 -
10, where 0 is no I/O and 10 is at least one disk is 100% saturated.

@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}io} will set both @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}start-io} and @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}run-io}.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}load} @emph{loadlimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}load} @emph{loadlimit}}

@item @strong{-L} @emph{loadlimit}
@anchor{@strong{-L} @emph{loadlimit}}

Limit for load average.

@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}load} will set both @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}start-load} and @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}run-load}.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}mem} @emph{memlimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}mem} @emph{memlimit}}

@item @strong{-M} @emph{memlimit}
@anchor{@strong{-M} @emph{memlimit}}

Limit for free memory. This is the amount of bytes available as free
+ cache. This limit is treated opposite other limits: If the system
is above the limit the program will run, if it is below the limit the
program will stop

@emph{memlimit} can be postfixed with K, M, G, T, or P which would
multiply the size with 1024, 1048576, 1073741824, or 1099511627776
respectively.

@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}mem} will set both @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}start-mem} and @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}run-mem}.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}noswap}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}noswap}}

@item @strong{-N}
@anchor{@strong{-N}}

No swapping. If the system is swapping both in and out it is a good
indication that the system is memory stressed.

@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}noswap} is over limit if the system is swapping both in and out.

@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}noswap} will set both @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}start-noswap} and @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}run-noswap}.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}net}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}net}}

Shorthand for @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}nethops 3}.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}nethops} @emph{h}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}nethops} @emph{h}}

Network nice. Pause if the internet connection is overloaded.

@strong{niceload} finds a router @emph{h} hops closer to the internet. It
@strong{ping}s this every second. If the latency is more than 50% bigger
than the median, it is regarded as being over the limit.

@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}nethops} can be combined with @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}hard}. Without @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}hard} the
program may be able to queue up so much traffic that it will take
longer than the @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}suspend} time to clear it. @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}hard} is useful for
traffic that does not break by being suspended for a longer time.

@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}nethops} can be combined with a high @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}suspend}. This way a
program can be allowed to do a bit of traffic now and then. This is
useful to keep the connection alive.

@item @strong{-n} @emph{niceness}
@anchor{@strong{-n} @emph{niceness}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}nice} @emph{niceness}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}nice} @emph{niceness}}

Sets niceness. See @strong{nice}(1).

@item @strong{-p} @emph{PID}[,@emph{PID}]
@anchor{@strong{-p} @emph{PID}[@comma{}@emph{PID}]}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}pid} @emph{PID}[,@emph{PID}]
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}pid} @emph{PID}[@comma{}@emph{PID}]}

Process IDs of processes to suspend. You can specify multiple process
IDs with multiple @strong{-p} @emph{PID} or by separating the PIDs with comma.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}prg} @emph{program}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}prg} @emph{program}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}program} @emph{program}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}program} @emph{program}}

Name of running program to suspend. You can specify multiple programs
with multiple @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}prg} @emph{program}. If no processes with the name
@emph{program} is found, @strong{niceload} with search for substrings containing
@emph{program}.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}quote}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}quote}}

@item @strong{-q}
@anchor{@strong{-q}}

Quote the command line. Useful if the command contains chars like *,
$, >, and " that should not be interpreted by the shell.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}run-io} @emph{iolimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}run-io} @emph{iolimit}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}ri} @emph{iolimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}ri} @emph{iolimit}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}run-load} @emph{loadlimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}run-load} @emph{loadlimit}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}rl} @emph{loadlimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}rl} @emph{loadlimit}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}run-mem} @emph{memlimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}run-mem} @emph{memlimit}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}rm} @emph{memlimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}rm} @emph{memlimit}}

Run limit. The running program will be slowed down if the system is
above the limit. See: @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}io}, @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}load}, @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}mem}, @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}noswap}.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}sensor} @emph{sensor program}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}sensor} @emph{sensor program}}

Read sensor. Use @emph{sensor program} to read a sensor.

This will keep the CPU temperature below 80 deg C on GNU/Linux:

@verbatim
  niceload -l 80000 -f 0.001 --sensor 'sort -n /sys/devices/platform/coretemp*/temp*_input' gzip *
@end verbatim

This will stop if the disk space < 100000.

@verbatim
  niceload -H -l -100000 --sensor "df . | awk '{ print \$4 }'" echo
@end verbatim

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}start-io} @emph{iolimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}start-io} @emph{iolimit}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}si} @emph{iolimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}si} @emph{iolimit}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}start-load} @emph{loadlimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}start-load} @emph{loadlimit}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}sl} @emph{loadlimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}sl} @emph{loadlimit}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}start-mem} @emph{memlimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}start-mem} @emph{memlimit}}

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}sm} @emph{memlimit}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}sm} @emph{memlimit}}

Start limit. The program will not start until the system is below the
limit. See: @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}io}, @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}load}, @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}mem}, @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}noswap}.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}soft}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}soft}}

@item @strong{-S}
@anchor{@strong{-S}}

Soft limit. @strong{niceload} will suspend a process for a while and then
let it run for a second thus only slowing down a process while the
system is over one of the given limits. This is the default.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}suspend} @emph{SEC}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}suspend} @emph{SEC}}

@item @strong{-s} @emph{SEC}
@anchor{@strong{-s} @emph{SEC}}

Suspend time. Suspend the command this many seconds when the max load
average is reached.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}recheck} @emph{SEC}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}recheck} @emph{SEC}}

@item @strong{-t} @emph{SEC}
@anchor{@strong{-t} @emph{SEC}}

Recheck load time. Sleep SEC seconds before checking load
again. Default is 1 second.

@item @strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}verbose}
@anchor{@strong{@asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}verbose}}

@item @strong{-v}
@anchor{@strong{-v}}

Verbose. Print some extra output on what is happening. Use @strong{-v} until
you know what your are doing.

@end table

@node EXAMPLE@asis{:} See niceload in action
@chapter EXAMPLE: See niceload in action

In terminal 1 run: top

In terminal 2 run:

@strong{niceload -q perl -e '$|=1;do@{$l==$r or print "."; $l=$r@}until(($r=time-$^T)}>@strong{50)'}

This will print a '.' every second for 50 seconds and eat a lot of
CPU. When the load rises to 1.0 the process is suspended.

@node EXAMPLE@asis{:} Run updatedb
@chapter EXAMPLE: Run updatedb

Running @strong{updatedb} can often starve the system for disk I/O and thus result in a high load.

Run @strong{updatedb} but suspend @strong{updatedb} if the load is above 2.00:

@strong{niceload -L 2 updatedb}

@node EXAMPLE@asis{:} Run rsync
@chapter EXAMPLE: Run rsync

@strong{rsync} can, just like @strong{updatedb}, starve the system for disk I/O
and thus result in a high load.

Run @strong{rsync} but keep load below 3.4. If load reaches 7 sleep for
(7-3.4)*12 seconds:

@strong{niceload -L 3.4 -f 12 rsync -Ha /home/ /backup/home/}

@node EXAMPLE@asis{:} Ensure enough disk cache
@chapter EXAMPLE: Ensure enough disk cache

Assume the program @strong{foo} uses 2 GB files intensively. @strong{foo} will run
fast if the files are in disk cache and be slow as a crawl if they are
not in the cache.

To ensure 2 GB are reserved for disk cache run:

@strong{niceload @asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}hard @asis{}-@asis{}-@asis{}run-mem 2g foo}

This will not guarantee that the 2 GB memory will be used for the
files for @strong{foo}, but it will stop @strong{foo} if the memory for disk cache
is too low.

@node ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
@chapter ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

None. In future versions $NICELOAD will be able to contain default settings.

@node EXIT STATUS
@chapter EXIT STATUS

Exit status should be the same as the command being run (untested).

@node REPORTING BUGS
@chapter REPORTING BUGS

Report bugs to <bug-parallel@@gnu.org>.

@node AUTHOR
@chapter AUTHOR

Copyright (C) 2004-11-19 Ole Tange, http://ole.tange.dk

Copyright (C) 2005-2010 Ole Tange, http://ole.tange.dk

Copyright (C) 2010-2024 Ole Tange, http://ole.tange.dk and Free
Software Foundation, Inc.

@node LICENSE
@chapter LICENSE

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
at your option any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

@node Documentation license I
@section Documentation license I

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
documentation under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and
with no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the
file LICENSES/GFDL-1.3-or-later.txt.

@node Documentation license II
@section Documentation license II

You are free:

@table @asis
@item @strong{to Share}
@anchor{@strong{to Share}}

to copy, distribute and transmit the work

@item @strong{to Remix}
@anchor{@strong{to Remix}}

to adapt the work

@end table

Under the following conditions:

@table @asis
@item @strong{Attribution}
@anchor{@strong{Attribution}}

You must attribute the work in the manner specified by the author or
licensor (but not in any way that suggests that they endorse you or
your use of the work).

@item @strong{Share Alike}
@anchor{@strong{Share Alike}}

If you alter, transform, or build upon this work, you may distribute
the resulting work only under the same, similar or a compatible
license.

@end table

With the understanding that:

@table @asis
@item @strong{Waiver}
@anchor{@strong{Waiver}}

Any of the above conditions can be waived if you get permission from
the copyright holder.

@item @strong{Public Domain}
@anchor{@strong{Public Domain}}

Where the work or any of its elements is in the public domain under
applicable law, that status is in no way affected by the license.

@item @strong{Other Rights}
@anchor{@strong{Other Rights}}

In no way are any of the following rights affected by the license:

@itemize
@item Your fair dealing or fair use rights, or other applicable
copyright exceptions and limitations;

@item The author's moral rights;

@item Rights other persons may have either in the work itself or in
how the work is used, such as publicity or privacy rights.

@end itemize

@end table

@table @asis
@item @strong{Notice}
@anchor{@strong{Notice}}

For any reuse or distribution, you must make clear to others the
license terms of this work.

@end table

A copy of the full license is included in the file as
LICENCES/CC-BY-SA-4.0.txt

@node DEPENDENCIES
@chapter DEPENDENCIES

GNU @strong{niceload} uses Perl, and the Perl modules POSIX, and
Getopt::Long.

@node SEE ALSO
@chapter SEE ALSO

@strong{parallel}(1), @strong{nice}(1), @strong{uptime}(1)

@bye
